














            The Hitchhikers Guide to the Internet
                        25 August 1987



                           Ed Krol
                    krol@uxc.cso.uiuc.edu




 This document was produced through funding of the National
 Science Foundation.

 Copyright (C) 1987, by the Board of Trustees of The University
 of Illinois.  Permission to duplicate this document, in whole
 or part, is granted provided reference is made to the source
 and this copyright is included in whole copies.


 This document assumes that one is familiar with the workings
 of a non-connected simple IP network (e.g. a few 4.2 BSD
 systems on an Ethernet not connected to anywhere else).
 Appendix A contains remedial information to get one to this
 point.  Its purpose is to get that person, familiar with a
 simple net, versed in the "oral tradition" of the Internet
 to the point that that net can be connected to the Internet
 with little danger to either.  It is not a tutorial, it
 consists of pointers to other places, literature, and hints
 which are not normally documented.  Since the Internet is a
 dynamic environment, changes to this document will be made
 regularly.  The author welcomes comments and suggestions.
 This is especially true of terms for the glossary (definitions
 are not necessary).




 In the beginning there was the ARPAnet, a wide area
 experimental network connecting hosts and terminal servers
 together.  Procedures were set up to regulate the allocation
 of addresses and to create voluntary standards for the network.
 As local area networks became more pervasive, many hosts became
 gateways to local networks.  A network layer to allow the
 interoperation of these networks was developed and called IP
 (Internet Protocol).  Over time other groups created long haul
 IP based networks (NASA, NSF, states...).  These nets, too,
 interoperate because of IP.  The collection of all of these
 interoperating networks is the Internet.

 Two groups do much of the research and information work of
 the Internet (ISI and SRI).  ISI (the Informational Sciences
 Institute) does much of the research, standardization, and
 allocation work of the Internet.  SRI International provides
 information services for the Internet.  In fact, after you
 are connected to the Internet most of the information in
 this document can be retrieved from the Network Information
 Center (NIC) run by SRI.



 Operating the Internet

 Each network, be it the ARPAnet, NSFnet or a regional network,
 has its own operations center.  The ARPAnet is run by
 BBN, Inc. under contract from DARPA.  Their facility is
 called the Network Operations Center or NOC.  Cornell
 University temporarily operates NSFnet (called the Network
 Information Service Center, NISC).  It goes on to the

                             -2-

 regionals having similar facilities to monitor and keep
 watch over the goings on of their portion of the Internet.
 In addition, they all should have some knowledge of what is
 happening to the Internet in total. If a problem comes up,
 it is suggested that a campus network liaison should contact
 the network operator to which he is directly connected. That
 is, if you are connected to a regional network (which is
 gatewayed to the NSFnet, which is connected to the
 ARPAnet...)  and have a problem, you should contact your
 regional network operations center.


 RFCs

 The internal workings of the Internet are defined by a set
 of documents called RFCs (Request for Comments).  The general
 process for creating an RFC is for someone wanting something
 formalized to write a document describing the issue and mailing
 it to Jon Postel (postel@isi.edu).  He acts as a referee for
 the proposal.  It is then commented upon by all those wishing
 to take part in the discussion (electronically of course).
 It may go through multiple revisions.  Should it be generally
 accepted as a good idea, it will be assigned a number and
 filed with the RFCs.

 The RFCs can be divided into five groups: required, suggested,
 directional, informational and obsolete.  Required RFC's (e.g.
 RFC-791, The Internet Protocol) must be implemented on any host
 connected to the Internet.  Suggested RFCs are generally
 implemented by network hosts.  Lack of them does not preclude
 access to the Internet, but may impact its usability.  RFC-793
 (Transmission Control Protocol) is a suggested RFC.  Directional
 RFCs were discussed and agreed to, but their application has never
 come into wide use.  This may be due to the lack of wide need for
 the specific application (RFC-937 The Post Office Protocol) or
 that, although technically superior, ran against other pervasive
 approaches (RFC-891 Hello).  It is suggested that should the
 facility be required by a particular site, animplementation
 be done in accordance with the RFC.  This insures that, should
 the idea be one whose time has come, the implementation will be
 in accordance with some standard and will be generally usable.
 Informational RFCs contain factual information about the
 Internet and its operation (RFC-990, Assigned Numbers).
 Finally, as the Internet and technology have grown, some
 RFCs have become unnecessary.  These obsolete RFCs cannot
 be ignored, however.  Frequently when a change is made to
 some RFC that causes a new one to be issued obsoleting others,
 the new RFC only contains explanations and motivations for the
 change.  Understanding the model on which the whole facility
 is based may involve reading the original and subsequent RFCs
 on the topic.

                             -3-

 (Appendix B contains a list of what are considered to be the
 major RFCs necessary for understanding the Internet).



 The Network Information Center

 The NIC is a facility available to all Internet users which
 provides information to the community.  There are three
 means of NIC contact: network, telephone, and mail.  The
 network accesses are the most prevalent.  Interactive access
 is frequently used to do queries of NIC service overviews,
 look up user and host names, and scan lists of NIC documents.
 It is available by using

      %telnet sri-nic.arpa

 on a BSD system and following the directions provided by a
 user friendly prompter.  From poking around in the databases
 provided one might decide that a document named NETINFO:NUG.DOC
 (The Users Guide to the ARPAnet) would be worth having.  It could
 be retrieved via an anonymous FTP.  An anonymous FTP would proceed
 something like the following.  (The dialogue may vary slightly
 depending on the implementation of FTP you are using).

      %ftp sri-nic.arpa
      Connected to sri-nic.arpa.
      220 SRI_NIC.ARPA FTP Server Process 5Z(47)-6 at Wed
17-Jun-87 12:00 PDT
      Name (sri-nic.arpa:myname): anonymous
      331 ANONYMOUS user ok, send real ident as password.
      Password: myname
      230 User ANONYMOUS logged in at Wed 17-Jun-87 12:01 PDT,
job 15.
      ftp> get netinfo:nug.doc
      200 Port 18.144 at host 128.174.5.50 accepted.
      150 ASCII retrieve of <NETINFO>NUG.DOC.11 started.
      226 Transfer Completed 157675 (8) bytes transferred
      local: netinfo:nug.doc  remote:netinfo:nug.doc
      157675 bytes in 4.5e+02 seconds (0.34 Kbytes/s)
      ftp> quit
      221 QUIT command received. Goodbye.

 (Another good initial document to fetch is
 NETINFO:WHAT-THE-NIC-DOES.TXT)!

 Questions of the NIC or problems with services can be asked
 of or reported to using electronic mail.  The following
 addresses can be used:

      NIC@SRI-NIC.ARPA         General user assistance, document requests
      REGISTRAR@SRI-NIC.ARPA   User registration and WHOIS updates
      HOSTMASTER@SRI-NIC.ARPA  Hostname and domain changes and updates
      ACTION@SRI-NIC.ARPA      SRI-NIC computer operations
      SUGGESTIONS@SRI-NIC.ARPA Comments on NIC publications and services

                             -4-

 For people without network access, or if the number of documents
 is large, many of the NIC documents are available in printed
 form for a small charge.  One frequently ordered document for
 starting sites is a compendium of major RFCs.  Telephone access is
 used primarily for questions or problems with network access.
 (See appendix B for mail/telephone contact numbers).



 The NSFnet Network Service Center

 The NSFnet Network Service Center (NNSC) is funded by NSF to
 provide a first level of aid to users of NSFnet should they
 have questions or encounter problems traversing the network.
 It is run by BBN Inc.  Karen Roubicek
 (roubicek@nnsc.nsf.net) is the NNSC user liaison.

 The NNSC, which currently has information and documents
 online and in printed form, plans to distribute news through
 network mailing lists, bulletins, newsletters, and online
 reports.  The NNSC also maintains a database of contact
 points and sources of additional information about NSFnet
 component networks and supercomputer centers.

 Prospective or current users who do not know whom to call
 concerning questions about NSFnet use, should contact the
 NNSC.  The NNSC will answer general questions, and, for
 detailed information relating to specific components of the
 Internet, will help users find the appropriate contact for
 further assistance.  (Appendix B)



 Mail Reflectors

 The way most people keep up to date on network news is
 through subscription to a number of mail reflectors.  Mail
 reflectors are special electronic mailboxes which, when they
 receive a message, resend it to a list of other mailboxes.
 This in effect creates a discussion group on a particular
 topic.  Each subscriber sees all the mail forwarded by the
 reflector, and if one wants to put his "two cents" in sends
 a message with the comments to the reflector....

 The general format to subscribe to a mail list is to find
 the address reflector and append the string -REQUEST to the
 mailbox name (not the host name).  For example, if you
 wanted to take part in the mailing list for NSFnet reflected
 by NSFNET@NNSC.NSF.NET, one sends a request to

                             -5-

 NSFNET-REQUEST@NNSC.NSF.NET.  This may be a wonderful scheme,
 but the problem is that you must know the list exists in the
 first place.  It is suggested that, if you are interested,
 you read the mail from one list (like NSFNET) and you will
 probably become familiar with the existence of others.
 A registration service for mail reflectors is provided by
 the NIC in the files NETINFO:INTEREST-GROUPS-1.TXT,
 NETINFO:INTEREST-GROUPS-2.TXT, and NETINFO:INTEREST-GROUPS-
 3.TXT.

 The NSFNET mail reflector is targeted at those people who
 have a day to day interest in the news of the NSFnet (the
 backbone, regional network, and Internet inter-connection
 site workers).  The messages are reflected by a central
 location and are sent as separate messages to each subscriber.
 This creates hundreds of messages on the wide area networks
 where bandwidth is the scarcest.

 There are two ways in which a campus could spread the news
 and not cause these messages to inundate the wide area
 networks.  One is to re-reflect the message on the campus.
 That is, set up a reflector on a local machine which forwards
 the message to a campus distribution list.  The other is
 to create an alias on a campus machine which places the
 messages into a notesfile on the topic.  Campus users who
 want the information could access the notesfile and see the
 messages that have been sent since their last access.  One
 might also elect to have the campus wide area network
 liaison screen the messages in either case and only forward
 those which are considered of merit.  Either of these
 schemes allows one message to be sent to the campus, while
 allowing wide distribution within.


 Address Allocation

 Before a local network can be connected to the Internet it
 must be allocated a unique IP address.  These addresses are
 allocated by ISI.  The allocation process consists of getting
 an application form received from ISI.  (Send a message
 to hostmaster@sri-nic.arpa and ask for the template for a
 connected address).  This template is filled out and mailed
 back to hostmaster.  An address is allocated and e-mailed back
 to you.  This can also be done by postal mail (Appendix B).

 IP addresses are 32 bits long.  It is usually written as
 four decimal numbers separated by periods (e.g., 192.17.5.100).
 Each number is the value of an octet of the 32 bits.  It was
 seen from the beginning that some networks might choose to
 organize themselves as very flat (one net with a lot of nodes)
 and some might organize hierarchically

                             -6-

 (many interconnected nets with fewer nodes each and a backbone).
 To provide for these cases, addresses were differentiated into
 class A, B, and C networks.  This classification had to with the
 interpretation of the octets.  Class A networks have the first
 octet as a network address and the remaining three as a host
 address on that network.  Class C addresses have three octets of
 network address and one of host.  Class B is split two and two.
 Therefore, there is an address space for a few large nets, a
 reasonable number of medium nets and a large number of small nets.
 The top two bits in the first octet are coded to tell the address
 format.  All of the class A nets have been allocated.  So one
 has to choose between Class B and Class C when placing an order.
 (There are also class D (Multicast) and E (Experimental) formats.
 Multicast addresses will likely come into greater use in the near
 future, but are not frequently used now).

 In the past sites requiring multiple network addresses
 requested multiple discrete addresses (usually Class C).
 This was done because much of the software available
 (not ably 4.2BSD) could not deal with subnetted addresses.
 Information on how to reach a particular network (routing
 information) must be stored in Internet gateways and packet
 switches.  Some of these nodes have a limited capability to
 store and exchange routing information (limited to about 300
 networks).  Therefore, it is suggested that any campus
 announce (make known to the Internet) no more than two
 discrete network numbers.

 If a campus expects to be constrained by this, it should
 consider subnetting.  Subnetting (RFC-932) allows one to
 announce one address to the Internet and use a  set of
 addresses on the campus.  Basically, one defines a mask
 which allows the network to differentiate between the
 network portion and host portion of the address.  By using a
 different mask on the Internet and the campus, the address
 can be interpreted in multiple ways.  For example, if a
 campus requires two networks internally and has the 32,000
 addresses beginning 128.174.X.X (a Class B address) allocated
 to it,  the campus could allocate 128.174.5.X to one part
 of campus and 128.174.10.X to another.  By advertising
 128.174 to the Internet with a subnet mask of FF.FF.00.00,
 the Internet would treat these two addresses as one. Within
 the campus a mask of FF.FF.FF.00 would be used, allowing the
 campus to treat the addresses as separate entities. (In reality
 you don't pass the subnet mask of FF.FF.00.00 to the Internet,
 the octet meaning is implicit in its being a class B address).
 A word of warning is necessary.  Not all systems know how to
 do subnetting.  Some 4.2BSD systems require additional
 software.  4.3BSD systems subnet as released.  Other devices

                             -7-

 and operating systems vary in the problems they have dealing
 with subnets.  Frequently these machines can be used as a
 leaf on a network but not as a gateway within the subnetted
 portion of the network.  As time passes and more systems
 become 4.3BSD based, these problems should disappear.

 There has been some confusion in the past over the format of
 an IP broadcast address.  Some machines used an address of
 all zeros to mean broadcast and some all ones.  This was
 confusing when machines of both type were connected to the
 same network. The broadcast address of all ones has been
 adopted to end the grief.  Some systems (e.g. 4.2 BSD) allow
 one to choose the format of the broadcast address.  If a
 system does allow this choice, care should be taken that the
 all ones format is chosen.  (This is explained in RFC-1009
 and RFC-1010).


 Internet Problems

 There are a number of problems with the Internet.  Solutions
 to the problems range from software changes to long term
 research projects. Some of the major ones are detailed
 below:

 Number of Networks

      When the Internet was designed it was to have about 50
      connected networks.  With the explosion of networking,
      the number is now approaching 300.  The software in a
      group of critical gateways (called the core gateways of
      the ARPAnet) are not able to pass or store much more
      than that number.  In the short term, core reallocation
      and recoding has raised the number slightly.  By the
      summer of '88 the current PDP-11 core gateways will be
      replaced with BBN Butterfly gateways which will solve
      the problem.

 Routing Issues

      Along with sheer mass of the data necessary to route
      packets to a large number of networks, there are many
      problems with the updating, stability, and optimality
      of the routing algorithms.  Much research is being done
      in the area, but the optimal solution to these routing
      problems is still years away.  In most cases the the
      routing we have today works, but sub-optimally and
      sometimes unpredictably.

                             -8-


 Trust Issues

      Gateways exchange network routing information.
      Currently, most gateways accept on faith that the
      information provided about the state of the network is
      correct.  In the past this was not a big problem since
      most of the gateways belonged to a single administrative
      entity (DARPA).  Now with multiple wide area networks
      under different administrations, a rogue gateway
      somewhere in the net could cripple the Internet.
      There is design work going on to solve both the problem of
      a gateway doing unreasonable things and providing enough
      information to reasonably route data between multiply
      connected networks (multi-homed networks).

 Capacity & Congestion

      Many portions of the ARPAnet are very congested during
      the busy part of the day.  Additional links are planned
      to alleviate this congestion, but the implementation
      will take a few months.


 These problems and the future direction of the Internet are
 determined by the Internet Architect (Dave Clark of MIT)
 being advised by the Internet Activities Board (IAB).  This
 board is composed of chairmen of a number of committees with
 responsibility for various specialized areas of the Internet.
 The committees composing the IAB and their chairmen are:

         Committee                            Chair
      Autonomous Networks                  Deborah Estrin
      End-to-End Services                  Bob Braden
      Internet Architecture                Dave Mills
      Internet Engineering                 Phil Gross
           EGP2                            Mike Petry
           Name Domain Planning            Doug Kingston
           Gateway Monitoring              Craig Partridge
           Internic                        Jake Feinler
           Performance & Congestion ControlRobert Stine
           NSF Routing                     Chuck Hedrick
           Misc. MilSup Issues             Mike St. Johns
      Privacy                              Steve Kent
      IRINET Requirements                  Vint Cerf
      Robustness & Survivability           Jim Mathis
      Scientific Requirements              Barry Leiner

 Note that under Internet Engineering, there are a set of
 task forces and chairs to look at short term concerns.  The
 chairs of these task forces are not part of the IAB.

                             -9-
 Routing


 Routing is the algorithm by which a network directs a packet
 from its source to its destination.  To appreciate the problem,
 watch a small child trying to find a table in a restaurant.
 From the adult point of view the structure of the dining room
 is seen and an optimal route easily chosen.  The child, however,
 is presented with a set of paths between tables where a good path,
 let alone the optimal one to the goal is not discernible.