




Produced by Dr. Gregory B. Newby









This is a preliminary edition.  The final first edition should be on
file around midnight, October 31, 1993.

As usual, the margination in these reports may be rough, and another
edition should appear, somewhat neater in appearance, as a Gutenberg
volunteer will probably start work on this shortly.

This file has been edited in such a manner as to delete redundancies
[some, not all] and extra spaces [some, not all], enough that a file
from Project Gutenberg should be enough smaller that storarge/search
requirements should be reduced by 15 to 20%.

To search for information on a specific country from the list below,
search for country:  Afganistan, for example.  You can also search
directly for one of the categories of that country as follows:

Afghanistan, Geography
Afghanistan, People
Afghanistan, Government
Afghanistan, Economy
Afghanistan, Communications
Afghanistan, Defense Forces


The Project Gutenberg Edition of the 1993 CIA World Factbook



Central Intelligence Agency

The World Factbook 1993

Notes, Definitions, and Abbreviations
A
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
American Samoa
Andorra
Angola
Anguilla
Antarctica
Antigua and Barbuda
Arctic Ocean
Argentina
Armenia
Aruba
Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Atlantic Ocean
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan

B
Bahamas, The
Bahrain
Baker Island
Bangladesh
Barbados
Bassas da India
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bermuda
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Bouvet Island
Brazil
British Indian Ocean Territory
British Virgin Islands
Brunei
Bulgaria
Burkina
Burma
Burundi

C
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Cayman Islands
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China (also see separate Taiwan entry)
Christmas Island
Clipperton Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Cook Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Costa Rica
Cote d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic

D
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic

E
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Europa Island

F
Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)
Faroe Islands
Fiji
Finland
France
French Guiana
French Polynesia
French Southern and Antarctic Lands

G
Gabon
Gambia, The
Gaza Strip
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Gibraltar
Glorioso Islands
Greece
Greenland
Grenada
Guadeloupe
Guam
Guatemala
Guernsey
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana

H
Haiti
Heard Island and McDonald Islands
Holy See (Vatican City)
Honduras
Hong Kong
Howland Island
Hungary

I
Iceland
India
Indian Ocean
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel (also see separate Gaza Strip and West Bank
entries)
Italy

J
Jamaica
Jan Mayen
Japan
Jarvis Island
Jersey
Johnston Atoll
Jordan (also see separate West Bank entry)
Juan de Nova Island

K
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kingman Reef
Kiribati
Korea, North
Korea, South
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan

L
Laos
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg

M
Macau
Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Man, Isle of
Marshall Islands
Martinique
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mayotte
Mexico
Micronesia, Federated States of
Midway Islands
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montserrat
Morocco
Mozambique

N
Namibia
Nauru
Navassa Island
Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands Antilles
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Niue
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Norway

O
Oman

P
Pacific Islands (Palau), Trust Territory of the
Pacific Ocean 2
Pakistan
Palmyra Atoll
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paracel Islands
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Pitcairn Islands
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico

Q
Qatar

R
Reunion
Romania
Russia
Rwanda

S
Saint Helena
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
San Marino
Sao Tome and Principe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia and Montenegro
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Spain
Spratly Islands
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Svalbard
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria

T
Taiwan entry follows Zimbabwe
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tokelau
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tromelin Island
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Turks and Caicos Islands
Tuvalu

U
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan

V
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Vietnam
Virgin Islands

W
Wake Island
Wallis and Futuna
West Bank
Western Sahara
Western Samoa
World

Y
Yemen

Z
Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Taiwan

Appendixes
A: The United Nations System
B: Abbreviations for International Organizations and Groups
C: International Organizations and Groups
D: Weights and Measures
E: Cross-Reference List of Geographic Names

Reference Maps
The World
North America
Central America and the
Caribbean
South America
Europe
Ethnic Groups in Eastern
Europe
Middle East
Africa
Asia
Commonwealth of Independent States--
European States
Commonwealth of Independent States--Central Asian States
Southeast Asia
Oceania
Arctic Region
Antarctic Region
Standard Time Zones of the World

There have been some significant changes in this edition. Czechoslovakia has
been superseded by the Czech Republic and Slovakia. Eritrea gained independence
from Ethiopia. The name of the Ivory Coast has been changed to Cote d'Ivoire and
the Vatican City became the Holy See. New entries include Location, Map
references, Abbreviation (often substituted for the country name), and Digraph
(two-letter country code). Names is a new entry which includes long and short
forms of both conventional and local names of countries as well as any former
names. Most diacritical marks have been omitted. The electronic files used to
produce the Factbook have been restructured into a database. As a result, the
formats of some entries in this edition have been changed. Additional changes
will occur in the 1994 Factbook. Irrigated land is a new entry with the data
separate from the Land use entry. The Disputes entry is now International
disputes. The GNP/GDP entry was renamed National Product and the per capita and
real growth rate data placed in separate entries. Similar changes were made in
the Population and Diplomatic Representation entries.

Abbreviations: (see Appendix B for international organizations and groups)

avdp.
avoirdupois

c.i.f.
cost, insurance, and freight

CY
calendar year

DWT
deadweight ton

est.
estimate

Ex-Im
Export-Import Bank of the United States

f.o.b.
free on board

FRG
Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany); used for information dated before 3
October 1990 or CY91

FY
fiscal year

GDP
gross domestic product

GDR
German Democratic Republic (East Germany); used for information dated before 3
October 1990 or CY91

GNP
gross national product

GRT
gross register ton

GWP
gross world product

km
kilometer

km2
square kilometer

kW
kilowatt

kWh
kilowatt hour

m
meter

NA
not available

NEGL
negligible

nm
nautical mile

NZ
New Zealand

ODA
official development assistance

OOF
other official flows

PDRY
People's Democratic Republic of Yemen [Yemen (Aden) or South Yemen]; used for
information dated before 22 May 1990 or CY91

UAE
United Arab Emirates

UK
United Kingdom

US
United States

USSR
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (Soviet Union); used for information dated
before 25 December 1991

YAR
Yemen Arab Republic [Yemen (Sanaa) or North Yemen]; used
for information dated before 22 May 1990 or CY91

Administrative divisions: The numbers, designatory terms, and first-order
administrative divisions are generally those approved by the US Board on
Geographic Names (BGN). Changes that have been reported but not yet acted on by
BGN are noted.

Area: Total area is the sum of all land and water areas delimited by
international boundaries and/or coastlines. Land area is the aggregate of all
surfaces delimited by international boundaries and/or coastlines, excluding
inland water bodies (lakes, reservoirs, rivers). Comparative areas are based on
total area equivalents. Most entities are compared with the entire US or one of
the 50 states. The smaller entities are compared with Washington, DC (178 km2,
69 miles 2) or The Mall in Washington, DC (0.59 km2, 0.23 miles 2,146 acres).

Birth rate: The average annual number of births during a year per 1,000
population at midyear; also known as crude birth rate.

Dates of information: In general, information available as of 1 January 1993 was
used in the preparation of this edition. Population figures are estimates for 1
July 1993, with population growth rates estimated for calendar year 1993. Major
political events have been updated through June 1993.

Death rate: The average annual number of deaths during a year per l,000
population at midyear; also known as crude death rate.

Digraphs: The digraph is a two-letter "country code'' that precisely identifies
every entity without overlap, duplication, or omission. AF, for example, is the
digraph for Afghanistan. It is a standardized geopolitical data element
promulgated in the Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS)
10-3 by the National Bureau of Standards (US Department of Commerce) and
maintained by the Office of the Geographer (US Department of State). The digraph
is used to eliminate confusion and incompatibility in the collection,
processing, and dissemination of area-specific data and is particularly useful
for interchanging data between databases.

Diplomatic representation: The US Government has diplomatic relations with 180
nations. The US has diplomatic relations with 174 of the 182 UN members
(excluding the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia whose status in the UN
is unclear)--the exceptions are Angola, Bhutan, Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Macedonia,
North Korea, and Vietnam. In addition, the US has diplomatic relations with 7
nations that are not in the UN-Andorra, Holy See, Kiribati, Nauru, Switzerland,
Tonga, and Tuvalu.

Economic aid: This entry refers to bilateral commitments of official development
assistance (ODA), which is defined as government grants that are administered
with the promotion of economic development and welfare of LDCs as their main
objective and are concessional in character and contain a grant element of at
least 25%, and other official flows (OOF) or transactions by the official sector
whose main objective is other than development motivated or whose grant element
is below the 25% threshold for ODA. OOF transactions include official export
credits (such as Ex-Im Bank credits), official equity and portfolio investment,
and debt reorganization by the official sector that does not meet concessional
terms. Aid is considered to have been committed when agreements are initialed by
the parties involved and constitute a formal declaration of intent.

Entities: Some of the nations, dependent areas, areas of special sovereignty,
and governments included in this publication are not independent, and others are
not officially recognized by the US Government. "Nation'' refers to a people
politically organized into a sovereign state with a definite territory.
"Dependent area" refers to a broad category of political entities that are
associated in some way with a nation. Names used for page headings are usually
the short-form names as approved by the US Board on Geographic Names. There are
266 entities in The World Factbook that may be categorized as follows:

NATIONS

182
UN members (excluding the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia whose status
in the UN is unclear)

8
nations that are not members of the UN--Andorra, Holy See, Kiribati, Nauru,
Serbia and Montenegro, Switzerland, Tonga, Tuvalu

OTHER

1
Taiwan

DEPENDENT AREAS

6
Australia--Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling)
Islands, Coral Sea Islands, Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Norfolk Island

2
Denmark--Faroe Islands, Greenland

16
France--Bassas da India, Clipperton Island, Europa Island, French Guiana, French
Polynesia, French Southern and Antarctic Lands, Glorioso Islands, Guadeloupe,
Juan de Nova Island, Martinique, Mayotte, New Caledonia, Reunion, Saint Pierre
and Miquelon, Tromelin Island, Wallis and Futuna

2
Netherlands--Aruba, Netherlands Antilles

3
New Zealand--Cook Islands, Niue, Tokelau

3
Norway--Bouvet Island, Jan Mayen, Svalbard

1
Portugal--Macau

16
United Kingdom--Anguilla, Bermuda, British Indian Ocean Territory, British
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, Gibraltar, Guernsey, Hong
Kong, Jersey, Isle of Man, Montserrat, Pitcairn Islands, Saint Helena, South
Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands

15
United States--American Samoa, Baker Island, Guam, Howland Island, Jarvis
Island, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Midway Islands, Navassa Island, Northern
Mariana Islands, Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (Palau), Palmyra Atoll,
Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, Wake Island

MISCELLANEOUS

6
Antarctica, Gaza Strip, Paracel Islands, Spratly Islands, West Bank, Western
Sahara

OTHER ENTITIES

4
oceans--Arctic Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, Indian Ocean, Pacific Ocean

1
World

266
total

note: The US Government does not recognize the four so-called independent
homelands of Bophuthatswana, Ciskei, Transkei, and Venda in South Africa.
Exchange rate: The value of a nation's monetary unit at a given date or over a
given period of time, as expressed in units of local currency per US dollar and
as determined by international market forces or official fiat.

Gross domestic product (GDP): The value of all goods and services produced
domestically in a given year.

Gross national product (GNP): The value of all goods and services produced
domestically in a given year, plus income earned abroad, minus income earned by
foreigners from domestic production.

Gross world product (GWP): The aggregate value of all goods and services
produced worldwide in a given year.

GNP/GDP methodology: In the "Economy'' section, GNP/GDP dollar estimates for the
OECD countries, the former Soviet republics, and the East European countries are
derived from purchasing power parity (PPP) calculations rather than from
conversions at official currency exchange rates. The PPP method normally
involves the use of international dollar price weights, which are applied to the
quantities of goods and services produced in a given economy. In addition to the
lack of reliable data from the majority of countries, the statistician faces a
major difficulty in specifying, identifying, and allowing for the quality of
goods and services. The division of a PPP GNP/GDP estimate in dollars by the
corresponding estimate in the local currency gives the PPP conversion rate. One
thousand dollars will buy the same market basket of goods in the US as one
thousand dollars--converted to the local currency at the PPP conversion rate--
will buy in the other country. GNP/GDP estimates for the LDCs, on the other
hand, are based on the conversion of GNP/GDP estimates in local currencies to
dollars at the official currency exchange rates. Because currency exchange rates
depend on a variety of international and domestic financial forces that often
have little relation to domestic output, use of these rates is less satisfactory
for calculating GNP/GDP than the PPP method. Furthermore, exchange rates may
suddenly go up or down by 10% or more because of market forces or official fiat
whereas real output has remained unchanged. One additional caution: the
proportion of, say, defense expenditures as a percent of GNP/GDP in local
currency accounts may differ substantially from the proportion when GNP/GDP
accounts are expressed in PPP terms, as, for example, when an observer estimates
the dollar level of Russian or Japanese military expenditures; similar problems
exist when components are expressed in dollars under currency exchange rate
procedures. Finally, as academic research moves forward on the PPP method, we
hope to convert all GNP/GDP estimates to this method in future editions of The
World Factbook.

Growth rate (population): The annual percent change in the population, resulting
from a surplus (or deficit) of births over deaths and the balance of migrants
entering and leaving a country. The rate may be positive or negative.

Illicit drugs: There are five categories of illicit drugs--narcotics,
stimulants, depressants (sedatives), hallucinogens, and cannabis. These
categories include many drugs legally produced and prescribed by doctors as well
as those illegally produced and sold outside medical channels.

Cannabis (Cannabis sativa) is the common hemp plant, which provides
hallucinogens with some sedative properties, and includes marijuana (pot,
Acapulco gold, grass, reefer), tetrahydrocannabinol (THC, Marinol), hashish
(hash), and hashish oil (hash oil).

Coca (Erythroxylon coca) is a bush, and the leaves contain the stimulant
cocaine. Coca is not to be confused with cocoa, which comes from cacao seeds and
is used in making chocolate, cocoa, and cocoa butter.

Cocaine is a stimulant derived from the leaves of the coca bush.

Depressants (sedatives) are drugs that reduce tension and anxiety and include
chloral hydrate, barbiturates (Amytal, Nembutal, Seconal, phenobarbital),
benzodiazepines (Librium, Valium), methaqualone (Quaalude), glutethimide
(Doriden), and others (Equanil, Placidyl, Valmid).

Drugs are any chemical substances that effect a physical, mental, emotional, or
behavioral change in an individual.

Drug abuse is the use of any licit or illicit chemical substance that results in
physical,
mental, emotional, or behavioral impairment in an individual.

Hallucinogens are drugs that affect sensation, thinking, self-awareness, and
emotion. Hallucinogens include LSD (acid, microdot), mescaline and peyote (mexc,
buttons, cactus), amphetamine variants (PMA, STP, DOB), phencyclidine (PCP,
angel dust, hog), phencyclidine analogues (PCE, PCPy, TCP), and others
(psilocybin, psilocyn).

Hashish is the resinous exudate of the cannabis or hemp plant (Cannabis sativa).

Heroin is a semisynthetic derivative of morphine.

Marijuana is the dried leaves of the cannabis or hemp plant (Cannabis sativa).

Narcotics are drugs that relieve pain, often induce sleep, and refer to opium,
opium derivatives, and synthetic substitutes. Natural narcotics include opium
(paregoric, parepectolin), morphine (MS-Contin, Roxanol), codeine (Tylenol
w/codeine, Empirin w/codeine, Robitussan AC), and thebaine. Semisynthetic
narcotics include heroin (horse, smack), and hydromorphone (Dilaudid). Synthetic
narcotics include meperidine or Pethidine (Demerol, Mepergan), methadone
(Dolophine, Methadose), and others (Darvon, Lomotil).

Opium is the milky exudate of the incised, unripe seedpod of the opium poppy.

Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum) is the source for many natural and
semisynthetic narcotics.

Poppy straw concentrate is the alkaloid derived from the mature dried opium
poppy.

Qat (kat, khat) is a stimulant from the buds or leaves of Catha edulis that is
chewed or drunk as tea.

Stimulants are drugs that relieve mild depression, increase energy and activity,
and include cocaine (coke, snow, crack), amphetamines (Desoxyn, Dexedrine),
phenmetrazine (Preludin), methylphenidate (Ritalin), and others (Cylert,
Sanorex, Tenuate).

Infant mortality rate: The number of deaths to infants under one year old in a
given year per l,000 live births occurring in the same year.

International disputes: This category includes a wide variety of situations that
range from traditional bilateral boundary disputes to unilateral claims of one
sort or another. Information regarding disputes over international boundaries
and maritime boundaries has been reviewed by the Department of State. References
to other situations may also be included that are border or frontier relevant,
such as resource disputes, geopolitical questions, or irredentist issues.
However, inclusion does not necessarily constitute official acceptance or
recognition by the US Government.

Irrigated land: The figure refers to the number of km 2 that is artifically
supplied with water.

Land use: Human use of the land surface is categorized as arable land--land
cultivated for crops that are replanted after each harvest (wheat, maize, rice);
permanent crops--land cultivated for crops that are not replanted after each
harvest (citrus, coffee, rubber); meadows and pastures--land permanently used
for herbaceous forage crops; forest and woodland land--under dense or open
stands of trees; and other--any land type not specifically mentioned above
(urban areas, roads, desert).

Leaders: The chief of state is the titular leader of the country who represents
the state at official and ceremonial funcions but is not involved with the day-
to-day activities of the government. The head of government is the
administrative leader who manages the day-to-day activities of the government.
In the UK, the monarch is the chief of state, and the Prime Minister is the head
of government. In the US, the President is both the chief of state and the head
of government.

Life expectancy at birth: The average number of years to be lived by a group of
people all born in the same year, if mortality at each age remains constant in
the future.

Literacy: There are no universal definitions and standards of literacy. Unless
otherwise noted, all rates are based on the most common definition--the ability
to read and write at a specified age. Detailing the standards that individual
countries use to assess the ability to read and write is beyond the scope of
this publication.

Maps: All maps will be available only in the printed version of The World
Factbook for the foreseeable future.

Maritime claims: The proximity of neighboring states may prevent some national
claims from being extended the full distance.

Merchant marine: All ships engaged in the carriage of goods. All commercial
vessels (as opposed to all nonmilitary ships), which excludes tugs, fishing
vessels, offshore oil rigs, etc.; also, a grouping of merchant ships by
nationality or register.

Captive register--A register of ships maintained by a territory, possession, or
colony primarily or exclusively for the use of ships owned in the parent
country; also referred to as an offshore register, the offshore equivalent of an
internal register. Ships on a captive register will fly the same flag as the
parent country, or a local variant of it, but will be subject to the maritime
laws and taxation rules of the offshore territory. Although the nature of a
captive register makes it especially desirable for ships owned in the parent
country, just as in the internal register, the ships may also be owned abroad.
The captive register then acts as a flag of convenience register, except that it
is not the register of an independent state.

Flag of convenience register--A national register offering registration to a
merchant ship not owned in the flag state. The major flags of convenience (FOC)
attract ships to their register by virtue of low fees, low or nonexistent
taxation of profits, and liberal manning requirements. True FOC registers are
characterized by having relatively few of the ships registered actually owned in
the flag state. Thus, while virtually any flag can be used for ships under a
given set of circumstances, an FOC register is one where the majority of the
merchant fleet is owned abroad. It is also referred to as an open register.

Flag state--The nation in which a ship is registered and which holds legal
jurisdiction over operation of the ship, whether at home or abroad. Differences
in flag state maritime legislation determine how a ship is manned and taxed and
whether a foreign-owned ship may be placed on the register.

Internal register--A register of ships maintained as a subset of a national
register. Ships on the internal register fly the national flag and have that
nationality but are subject to a separate set of maritime rules from those on
the main national register. These differences usually include lower taxation of
profits, manning by foreign nationals, and, usually, ownership outside the flag
state (when it functions as an FOC register). The Norwegian International Ship
Register and Danish International Ship Register are the most notable examples of
an internal register. Both have been instrumental in stemming flight from the
national flag to flags of convenience and in attracting foreignowned ships to
the Norwegian and Danish flags.

Merchant ship--A vessel that carries goods against payment of freight; commonly
used to denote any nonmilitary ship but accurately restricted to commercial
vessels only.

Register--The record of a ship's ownership and nationality as listed with the
maritime authorities of a country; also, the compendium of such individual
ships' registrations. Registration of a ship provides it with a nationality and
makes it subject to the laws of the country in which registered (the flag state)
regardless of the nationality of the ship's ultimate owner.

Money figures: All are expressed in contemporaneous US dollars unless otherwise
indicated.

National product: The total output of goods and services in a country in a given
year. See Gross domestic product (GDP), Gross national product (GNP), and
GNP/GDP methodology.

Net migration rate: The balance between the number of persons entering and
leaving a country during the year per 1,000 persons (based on midyear
population). An excess of persons entering the country is referred to as net
immigration (3.56 migrants/1,000 population); an excess of persons leaving the
country as net emigration (-9.26 migrants/1,000 population).

Population: Figures are estimates from the Bureau of the Census based on
statistics from population censuses, vital registration systems, or sample
surveys pertaining to the recent past, and on assumptions about future trends.

Total fertility rate: The average number of children that would be born per
woman if all women lived to the end of their childbearing years and bore
children according to a given fertility rate at each age.

Years: All year references are for the calendar year (CY) unless indicated as
fiscal year (FY).

